---
tutorial: lemp-ubuntu-20
---
## 2 — Installing MySQL

Now that you have a web server up and running, you need to install the database system to be able to store and manage data for your site. MySQL is a popular database management system used within PHP environments.

Again, use `apt` to acquire and install this software:

```command
sudo apt install mysql-server
```

When prompted, confirm installation by typing `Y`, and then `ENTER`.

When the installation is finished, it's recommended that you run a security script that comes pre-installed with MySQL. This script will remove some insecure default settings and lock down access to your database system. Start the interactive script by running:

```command
sudo mysql_secure_installation
```

This will ask if you want to configure the `VALIDATE PASSWORD PLUGIN`.

<$>[note]
**Note:** Enabling this feature is something of a judgment call. If enabled, passwords which don't match the specified criteria will be rejected by MySQL with an error. It is safe to leave validation disabled, but you should always use strong, unique passwords for database credentials.
<$>

Answer `Y` for yes, or anything else to continue without enabling.

```
VALIDATE PASSWORD PLUGIN can be used to test passwords
and improve security. It checks the strength of password
and allows the users to set only those passwords which are
secure enough. Would you like to setup VALIDATE PASSWORD plugin?

Press y|Y for Yes, any other key for No:
```

If you answer “yes”, you'll be asked to select a level of password validation. Keep in mind that if you enter `2` for the strongest level, you will receive errors when attempting to set any password which does not contain numbers, upper and lowercase letters, and special characters, or which is based on common dictionary words.

```
There are three levels of password validation policy:

LOW    Length >= 8
MEDIUM Length >= 8, numeric, mixed case, and special characters
STRONG Length >= 8, numeric, mixed case, special characters and dictionary              file

Please enter 0 = LOW, 1 = MEDIUM and 2 = STRONG: <^>1<^>
```

Regardless of whether you chose to set up the `VALIDATE PASSWORD PLUGIN`, your server will next ask you to select and confirm a password for the MySQL **root** user. This is not to be confused with the **system root**. The **database root** user is an administrative user with full privileges over the database system. Even though the default authentication method for the MySQL root user dispenses the use of a password, **even when one is set**, you should define a strong password here as an additional safety measure. We'll talk about this in a moment.

If you enabled password validation, you'll be shown the password strength for the root password you just entered and your server will ask if you want to continue with that password. If you are happy with your current password, enter `Y` for "yes" at the prompt:

```
Estimated strength of the password: <^>100<^> 
Do you wish to continue with the password provided?(Press y|Y for Yes, any other key for No) : <^>y<^>
```

For the rest of the questions, press `Y` and hit the `ENTER` key at each prompt. This will remove some anonymous users and the test database, disable remote root logins, and load these new rules so that MySQL immediately respects the changes you have made.

When you're finished, test if you're able to log in to the MySQL console by typing:

```command
sudo mysql
```

This will connect to the MySQL server as the administrative database user **root**, which is inferred by the use of `sudo` when running this command. You should see output like this:

```
[secondary_label Output]
Welcome to the MySQL monitor.  Commands end with ; or \g.
Your MySQL connection id is 22
Server version: 8.0.19-0ubuntu5 (Ubuntu)

Copyright (c) 2000, 2020, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.

Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle Corporation and/or its
affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of their respective
owners.

Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the current input statement.

mysql> 
```

To exit the MySQL console, type:

```custom_prefix(mysql>)
exit
```

Notice that you didn't need to provide a password to connect as the **root** user, even though you have defined one when running the `mysql_secure_installation` script. That is because the default authentication method for the administrative MySQL user is `unix_socket` instead of `password`. Even though this might look like a security concern at first, it makes the database server more secure because the only users allowed to log in as the **root** MySQL user are the system users with sudo privileges connecting from the console or through an application running with the same privileges. In practical terms, that means you won't be able to use the administrative database **root** user to connect from your PHP application. Setting a password for the **root** MySQL account works as a safeguard, in case the default authentication method is changed from `unix_socket` to `password`.

For increased security, it's best to have dedicated user accounts with less expansive privileges set up for every database, especially if you plan on having multiple databases hosted on your server.

<$>[note]
**Note:** At the time of this writing, the native MySQL PHP library `mysqlnd` [doesn't support](https://www.php.net/manual/en/ref.pdo-mysql.php) `caching_sha2_authentication`, the default authentication method for MySQL 8. For that reason, when creating database users for PHP applications on MySQL 8, you'll need to make sure they're configured to use `mysql_native_password` instead. We'll demonstrate how to do that in [Step 6](#step-6-—-testing-database-connection-from-php-\(optional\)).
<$>

Your MySQL server is now installed and secured. Next, we'll install PHP, the final component in the LEMP stack.

