---
tutorial: how-to-optimize-wordpress-ubuntu-20
---
## 2 — Consider Your Theme

There are a wide range of available themes that can be used or customized for WordPress. Many themes can be configured with user-friendly drag and drop interfaces, integrated with custom plugins and more. When setting up your WordPress site, it’s a good idea to initially consider **only** the essential features that you’ll use for the lifecycle of your site, adding more as you grow.

### Optimizing Theme Configuration

Starting with a lightweight theme can help your installation to load more efficiently. A theme will require fewer database calls and by keeping your site free of unnecessary code, your users will have fewer delays in site speed and performance.

For any theme selected, be sure to **turn off or disable** any features offered with the theme that you won’t need or use. These can be preferences offered in the **Appearance** section of the WordPress dashboard, typically under *Theme Editor* or *Customize*. Turning off features you don’t use reduces the number of requests and calls happening to query for data in the background.

While there are a number of free and paid options for WordPress themes available online, many use [page builders](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-pagebuilder/) that add excess shortcode and unused code that will affect the performance of your site. Consider your use case when deciding whether or not to use a page builder, as they typically include a lot of extra processes that will have an impact on your site’s speed.

### Considering Plugin Use

WordPress plugins offer extended functionality for WordPress installations through added code that allows users to customize their installations to suit their specific needs. There are over 56,000 currently available plugins, making them an appealing way to add additional features to a WordPress site.

While plugins can increase the efficiency of your site, care should be taken in selecting quality plugins that are maintained and updated regularly. Because many plugins not only add code to your site but entries to your WordPress installation’s database, using too many plugins may cause site speed issues over time.



